There is, and do you mind putting that in the chat one more time, Stephanie?

There will be show notes.

The show notes are in the chat now.

Because I had a few, I thought it might be helpful to just have a little bit of detail about what we're talking about.

Okay, here we go.

Let's mute.

And let's start the recording. welcome this is gene maroney of thinking directions and this is the long promised q a on the memory affect system after i gave the two classes in june explaining some of the basic elements of my model actually i i really didn't get there's a lot more to the model which i didn't get to, but I explained the basics of it and I got a lot of interesting questions in.

And I really appreciate those questions because as I told David afterwards, I really have been, it was a little premature for me to talk about this because I'm still trying to work out how to explain it objectively and make sure I've got it all worked out.

It makes, this is normal in the progression of knowledge is that you get to a point where you can see something for yourself, but then, and then you conceptualize it.

And for me, I actually conceptualized it.

I drew last summer.

This is a year ago and really got clear.

Yes, this really does work, but it's another major step to make it so that it's objective to an audience.

Among other things you need to essentialize and you need to figure out the right order of things and one of the things that i realized after having given those two sessions i didn't put this model in perspective and i think so i've got uh in the show notes i've got uh i've got the first thing that i want to talk about is that there are really four distinct phenomena that are involved in some way in this discussion but and and then so let me say what they are so one is what's actually stored in memory the structures stored in memory which presumably is neurons connected to each other that fire in various ways right i don't i'm deliberately not trying to connect it to neuroscience i don't know enough neuroscience for that i believe we need to do psychology to infer what is going on in memory or what you know it's a model of what's going on in memory, which then at some point we'll be able to, with neuroscience, be able to either prove them, give a physical basis for the model or explain the model in some other way or whatever.

And the model isn't contrary to anything we know about memory, but it's not about neuroscience, science but it's a model of memory it's not a model of the brain right it's a model of how the knowledge gets stored and that is the thing that is fairly stable and I think when we talk about mental entities you know that you think of an entity as being something stable I think we're talking about the structures in memory now and and that is you know stable over time at any given time, your memory has a certain structure.

And when you were looking out of the world, or, uh, you know, making a decision or, you know, you going through some mental action, it will trigger memory in a predictable way.

So memory is the, is completely, um, what gets stored, I believe, depends on what you pay attention to, but what gets triggered also depends on what you pay attention to.

And there's an affect element of what gets triggered too.

So memory is tied into the affect system.

And that's why I call it the memory affect system.

But that's stuff.

The stuff in memory is the stuff that's stored.

Affect is always created on the fly.

Affect, I don't think is stored, but things in memory can be connected to the affect system so that they can create affect when they get triggered.

So that's one phenomenon, but there are three other phenomenon that it's easy to confuse them with.

So the second phenomenon is the experience that gets generated.

And I have a hypothesis that this is that experience.

So we're talking about emotions, ideas flitting through the back of your mind, images.

You know, you can have an image of what happened when you were four years old.

Those things, those I would call those experiences, and my hypothesis is experience per se is stuff that is generated by the memory affect system.

And what's interesting about experiences is presumably the brain, right, the memory affect system creates something that we're aware of, right?

This is a little bit, it's like it creates a phenomenon that we are aware of.

This is kind of a weird thing, right?

We're not aware of the structure of memory.

We are aware of the emotions.

We are aware when an idea pops up.

So we're aware of products of memory that get, you know, basically put into attention by the memory affixism.

So like emotions, one of the things I like to say about emotions is that they grab your attention to the emotion, right, or to the object of the emotion.

If it's a threat, they grab.

If it's a value, they grab your attention and put it on the value.

So the memory affect system interacts with attention and can draw attention and can put things into the fringes of attention and sometimes into the focus of attention.

So experience is a very interesting thing.

People, you know, experience is not a word that is discussed much, say, in the objectivist corpus.

And it's over discussed.

It's used in lieu of awareness in other traditions.

But I think it's a real thing, and I think we need a word for this.

And I think my identification is this is something that's actually created from memory that we're aware of.

That's interesting.

So it's a phenomenon, but it's created as something that we can be, in effect, self-aware of.

Okay, so that's experience.

Now, different from experience is mental actions. and here experience is non-volitional it's automatic i think it's a product of the memory affect system and so this includes like if you're feeling hungry this is a product of mostly the affect system right body senses i i think body senses all have affect associated with them in my experience now some of that is perceptual in that you're aware of your body as an object of awareness and then we would call that perceptual but to the extent things are hunger feeling cold which is uncomfortable any of those feelings are really part of the affect system um now in contrast the there are actions of consciousness and here i really mean volitional actions so you can turn your attention to different things so i want you to turn your attention to your right big toe how does your right big toe feel right now my right big toe is not supporting any of the weight of my foot that's interesting my heel my right heel is supporting weight and the ball is supporting some weight but the toe is kind of floating okay i i'm able to just deliberately someone says turn your attention to your big toe i can you can do that too and you can do that as part of monitoring if you're if you're an athlete at times you need to monitor or your body.

Or if you're an athlete, let's take another athletic example.

Keep your eye on the ball.

This is a real thing.

So Gene, the totally non-athletic person had to learn over the age of 50 that keep your eye on the ball really is a thing.

You need to pay attention to where the ball is going.

Otherwise you will not hit it.

You will not hit it.

But that's a deliberate volitional act.

So directing attention is a volitional act.

Making a judgment.

So now we're talking, this is a conceptual thing is this good or bad that's a volitional act asking a question you know querying for more information gee is there more i need to know about my toe i'm just thinking okay i'm obsessed by my right big toe because i have a bunion on that foot and the toe is kind of crooked and i'm trying to get the foot to take weight properly so you're hearing a lot about my big toe and you just heard more because i asked myself more on the big toe and boom you heard about my bunion probably more than you ever wanted to know but that is a volition there's mental actions you can take and there you don't like watch the action you just do the action you say more you say you know um you know in effect good or bad yes or no it's it's just you do it and it's a later time you conceptualize the action that you do and then so that's a third phenomenon right distinct phenomenon the fourth phenomenon is the awareness per se so all of this is to direct your attention to actually be aware of something in reality and i in in these cases with the ball it's really easy the thing in reality you're trying to be aware of you're you're aware of is the ball now the actual awareness i think is unanalyzable when we say consciousness is an axiom we really mean it it's you just you see it like it's you can tell the difference between if you have your eyes open your eyes closed yeah i see it when my eyes are open or if you look the other way i don't see it anymore what's happening when you see it i mean there can be experiences associated with that there can be actions that you're taking with respect to that but the actual scene is unanalyzable that's where you really get to hey folks consciousness is an axiom let's not confuse the awareness with the actions you take and the experiences you have.

One of the reasons I think this gets confusing is that sometimes the object of our attention is something that is in effect, though it's not perceptual, right?

It's obvious when it's a ball, but like when I'm talking about the memory ethics system, this is a model of how memories are structured.

So it's a generalized idea. now you have a memory right but you only know about your memory by inference by seeing that you remember some things and you don't remember others and i only was able to come up with this memory affect system by inference from a lot of experience in effect what would have to be the structure in order to make to certain kind of experiences and to explain how it is some things get stored and some things don't get stored uh but it's it's entirely inferential and that's true of all conceptual products right that you can't actually look at the thing like um if you take just a concept husband right i mean you can pay attention to like i'm now thinking about my husband my husband right harry binswanger now that is a particular real concrete entity and i can turn my attention to him and I've got my attention on him so a picture is coming up and but that's Harry if I want to focus on husband this is an abstraction and having that concept lets you think about in effect that kind of thing which is a real you know there are reference out there in reality but you're you're looking at them all from a certain respect right so there is a reference in reality but it's unanalyzable in a certain way and i think it's important to realize the reason we use concepts is so that we can pay attention to some interesting aspect of reality or so i hope that was helpful that these are really four different distinct phenomena and the thing that i've been talking about in these classes is what's the structure of the memory really the structure of memory and how it works with the memory affect system how it builds up A quick question.

Are emotions an experience?

Yes, emotions are an experience.

They're like the most obvious experience.

In fact, this gets to Susan, who very kindly asked the most basic questions possible, and I really appreciate it.

It's like, yeah, I should have answered these questions when I started.

It's her first question.

Why do I want to generate a new model of memory?

So helps to know the old models of memory.

Now, I have not surveyed the literature in great detail but i did go to kerningy mellon for my you know my master's in psychology mental psychology which is one of the biggest centers for cognitive experimental psychology there is and there were two big competing theories of memory uh the production systems theory which is from herb simon and is the idea that there are rules and that rules get created and then they generate and they cause action and the other is the connectionist model which is the basis of neural networks neural networks use the connectionist model from psychology to start you know they basically there's a big overlap between what the computer science people were doing and what the psychology people were doing and it's the same idea the idea it's connections and you can have like hidden layers that could explain interesting phenomenon and i essentially accepted the connectionist model i mean i do i don't think the production systems model is correct although there are some things that act like rules but i think they're explained by something more like a connectionist model and uh the activation model of memory actionist model uh which i think is the right the idea that what's in awareness then triggers things that things are at a certain activation level and when they get over a threshold then i would say you get an experience of them and that that's has some characteristics it's it's got um uh recency effect so the thing that you've been paying attention to all of the information you have about that kind of stays in a kind of ready way so it's easier to trigger it over the threshold into and i would you know i used to say into awareness but i'd say to create an experience to create an experience and attention so i'm basically in alignment with that uh theory of memory but that theory really only works for cognitive stuff it does not explain emotions as far as i can tell no one has tried to explain emotions through memory and i think it through memory and through a connection obviously with pleasure and pain because pleasure and pain is critical to understanding emotions.

I think emotions are the phenomenon that needs to be understood.

Emotions are very unusual because they involve all three aspects of psychology.

Not me.

Traditional view of psychology is, well, traditional.

Psychology is a somewhat fragmented field.

So this is my husband's view and it's not crazy compared to what people who actually believe in consciousness think.

There are really three aspects of psychology.

There's the cognitive part.

Obviously, somehow through our minds, we were able to gain and store knowledge.

And epistemology is about the rules for how do you do that.

Psychology has the question of, well, how does it actually get, how does it get stored?

What are the mental processes you take?

And how do we explain those processes and how they actually cause, you know, a grasp of reality or things that's the kind of thing that we want to understand with while understanding that awareness is an axiom and uh but that's we want to understand that so that you can understand particularly uh so you can have self-awareness about your own knowledge and and have better understanding about how do you strategically grow your knowledge so cognition is a huge branch of psychology.

Then there's motivation, huge branch of psychology, right?

For some people, they think it's all about motivation, but motivation is, you know, why do you do what you do?

And it includes, um, the, the actual, you know, the actual motive power, you know, this is something that I don't think is well discussed.

I'm not exactly sure what the right answer here is. some people hypothesize it's actually an action impulse that causes you to actually act because you can have an emotion for something and not act and you can have you you you can so impulses i'm not sure what the right way to think about this is but motivation is what actually causes you to act and of course one of the problems with the classic view of psychology is that they really of you motivation is deterministic there's the environmentalist environmental determinisms which think you're a product of you know it affects society and your family and what's happened before and there are the um hereditary determinists who think it's really a product of your genes and you know of course i think both of these are wrong i think the fundamental is how you use volition and uh that you can't understand motivation without understanding its in its relationship to cognition now that is not that for in objectivism that's not a controversial view right emotions are a product of ideas but there is a third element which is important which is the opponent so this is when we talk about literal habits so for example you learn to be able to catch a ball to go back to another perceptual example you do not need to direct yourself to move your arm in fact you really consciously volitionally what you need to do is keep your eye on the ball and if you have like for me swung a tennis racket at enough so it connected with the bottle if you hold the ball in mind your perceptual motor system will basically do the right thing i mean that's part of the problem volitionally controlling action is learning where do you need to pay attention versus where don't you pay attention because you can easily turn into a centipede where you're trying to control every one of your legs and you fall over right so there is something this is what what i would call is true automatization or And I'm not sure if we should even use that word, but the training of the mechanics and the control of physical action is the aspect of the science of psychology.

And I'll tell you, these three things have not been combined in a theory of memory.

And I think one theory of memory needs to explain all of these because concepts are the key thing and concepts are stored in memory.

So we need to understand how it is you can conceptually, like as an athlete, control your body amazingly.

Or, of course, a big influence on me is F.M.

Alexander.

For those of you who don't know, he's the person who invented the Alexander technique.

And I'll give the story in three sentences.

He used to love reciting Shakespeare for an audience, and he lost his voice.

So he went to the doctors and asked, what's the problem?

and they didn't know and he said am i doing anything wrong and they said who knows so he looked at himself in the mirror and he figured out what he was doing wrong and he figured out how to let go of the body tension that was causing him to tie up and lose his voice and the alexander technique is training in volitional control over your body getting out of your own the automatized perceptual motor system go ahead and it's it's very interesting it's had a big impact on my work uh these three things need to be integrated alexander technique is off you know in in the world cognition and motivation in psychology they really are not studied together these three things need to be integrated and a proper model of memory can help with that um deborah is this a question right on this issue i may i may have missed something but you said that these three things cognition motivation what would you name action action cognition motivation action okay motivation is in effect the desire to do it and the action the actual control of your body i wasn't sure um i was confused okay thank you yes thank you for asking for the clarification so um so that is both why i wanted to do it and why it's distinct because it integrates those all I see you nodding, Susan, so I take it that's a satisfaction.

So then the next question she asked was, why did I change the term subconscious to memory affect system?

So I have a list of things here.

The reason I did that is that, oh, my God, people are so sloppy and saying, oh, that gets done in the subconscious.

Oh, that gets automatized.

Oh, there are subconscious value judgments that cause emotions.

Oh, your subconscious works on that when you're asleep and it comes up, it pops up the answer.

There are so many things attributed to the subconscious.

And so I think it's really confused.

There are a number of reasons to not use that term.

Lee Pearson gave the best reason not to use that term.

The way people use it and the way people think about it, They think it's a kind of consciousness that's just a little lower down.

But the subconscious, you know, what Leonard Peikoff, in the only statement that anyone has ever made as to what the subconscious is, Leonard Peikoff says in OPAR, he doesn't make it look like a definition.

He says, it's the sum of total contents stored of things that you were past aware of that are now stored.

That's memory.

That's just memory. but when people use the term they make it sound like there's a little genie and they're doing a lot of stuff now i think that that is so uh so lee's point is it makes it seem like it's a kind of consciousness it's not a kind of consciousness the memory affect system is not a kind of consciousness it's a storage device that can create experience experience is different from the memory affect system experience is a product of the memory affect system and i think sometimes when people say oh that that's my subconscious is saying such and such what they mean is that they're having experience of stuff with generated from memory so in order to really talk about this and to separate these four distinct phenomena i think we need to be more careful about you know what this is are and what they do and related to that i think with the right structure of memory and the right integration to affect that um which i tried to indicate to you in the earlier things you can explain a lot of weird behavior that people think needs need something else so i tried to make a list of this so like emotions are the product of automatized value judgments.

Now, the way that sounds, there's something right about that, but there's something wrong about that because you can see, you can have an emotion like about something coming toward you that you've never been in that situation before.

You've never had a truck coming, you know, toward you.

You've had other smaller things come toward you, but, you know, it's not like you have value judgments about trucks coming it's not like you need to have a stored value judgment about that there's some kind of generative capacity with emotions uh same thing with creativity you know creativity people explain in terms of or excuse me they try to explain in terms of well you know there was just some subconscious processing going on and then it brought up this other thing i think that's all explained by the structure of values and by the context that's been activated i don't think there's anything mysterious and that's what i've been looking for i think the proper explanation of all these things needs to be fairly simple and explain even fairly complex phenomenon um so let's see right so you can have emotions where you've never had that evaluation is really unique you can have emotions about that you have creativity um there's a lot of discussion of implicit knowledge now i do think there is such a thing as in effect knowledge that is only gained at the perceptual level but when you talk about something like um actually this is going to get on to brian's questions hold on to brian's question hold on to the next question because we're going to talk about emotional generalization which is a of something which sounds really mysterious and I think my model explains.

I think you can't explain with most so the other way that people explain things like in the objectivist group people try to explain things as I would say in terms of sentences that get stored and I think there are some sentences that get stored there's some rules that get stored there's sometimes principles that get stored but for the most part sentences aren't stored and to get something like uh i guess i should go to brian's question let me read brian's question this is a very interesting question too i have a question uh in the romantic manifesto in the article philosophy and sense of life ayn rand says quote a sense of life is formed by a process of emotional generalization which may be described as a subconscious counter abstraction since it is a method of classifying and integrating oh excuse me that was supposed to be comma since it is a method of classifying and integrating but it is a process of emotional abstraction it consists of classifying things according to the emotions they invoke now this is a very confusing paragraph this is the only place the term emotional generalization ever appears harry has talked with me about how confusing this is but i actually think this is explained by my method let's see let me get i have the um let me get this i i actually need i kind of jump into this because this is a really good concretization of why I think it's needed.

So let's take a sentence like the world is noble, which is really critical to sense of life and which you sure don't have at three and, you know, probably took a philosopher recently.

And yet if you think the world is noble, that will lead to a benevolent sense of life, right?

How is that formed?

So I think that's explained by my model because if you think about it as a little kid or even as an adult, what happens when you get to a new situation where you don't know stuff?

Well, if you're in a healthy environment and you're encouraged to explore, you go and you explore a little bit and you learn stuff.

Now, what happens when you do that?

You get a positive experience.

And that is stored, that's not conceptualized, but it is stored as an experience that, as I said, has a beginning and an end, and the end is positive compared to the beginning.

And you do that again and again and again.

And eventually, when you get to any new place, you have a kind of expectation.

Oh, you know, I'm going to learn.

Not in words.

It's not conceptual, but it is a little bit of positive affect, and it probably leads to a little curiosity.

It's an example of an emotion which is not caused by past conceptual content.

It's caused by past experiences where you took action, you took purposeful action that was, in fact, successful.

And this kind of thing, if you, over the course of your young life or your long life, if when you go into a new situation, you try to understand and you actually get understanding, that's a positive experience.

Great.

Or if you get, you know, this is something that I think parents can make a huge difference in because they can put the child in an understandable situation.

So Montessori tries to do this, right?

She tries to simplify the classroom, simplify the materials, so that a child just going in and kind of experimenting for themselves can figure things out on their own.

And that, they do not know that they are figuring things out on their own, but they are figuring things out on their own.

And they have positive experiences from them.

Just the same, so in the theory that I told you, or the model that I told you last June, see, I'm still getting the language exactly right.

I say a model because we got to think of this as a model.

This is not like how it is.

This is a model so you can hold in your mind how it works.

That like mom could become a value, right?

Remember, because mom had been associated with being hungry and drinking milk and feeling better.

Or having a big bunch of gas inside and being jiggled and burped and feeling better.

And being too hot and uncomfortable and having clothes changed and feeling better.

And being all wet and icky and having the diaper changed and feeling better.

And eventually, after enough of those specific experiences that all involve feeling better, they're all, you know, mom is the common denominator between them.

As a result, when you see mom, you will feel this positive experience.

And that is love.

Right?

That is love.

That's how a value forms.

Simple case. the case we're talking here with sense of life it's much more diffuse because it's a recognition of this is a new thing and i i don't know what is going on here right so this is not a particular object like it is with mom but you can recognize this is a similar situation to what i've been in certainly once you get to a conceptual level you like you have the concept new right or you know you have enough concepts that you can recognize oh yeah I'm in a new situation now does that trigger fear or does that trigger curiosity for you that is going to be based on your past experience and it is not based on some conceptualization of whether it's scary or not it's based on your actual success in these situations and that's why now of course parents if you have a very fearful for a parent, they can make it be really scary and they can actually create problems for this.

But then an independent kid can rebel against that and just go and succeed themselves.

So this is an example where something like sense of life and emotional generalization, I think can be explained with this model.

And that's powerful.

If you can explain something as complicated as emotional generalization and sense of life with this model we're solving a lot of problems here and we're simplifying our understanding of psychology so that it's not mysterious and you can if you don't feel passionate about your career you can either figure out a new career or get passionate about it you know this is what we want to actually have strategic control over our own psychologies and you for that you need to really understand how it works so that you can choose so you can choose how to in effect reprogram it and the thing that you're reprogramming is the structures in memory um how's that susan is that a good example for you i see her trying to unmute but it just it just won't let her unmute i don't know why I think it let me unmute now.

Yes, that's very helpful.

Thank you.

Sorry that took a little while.

I'm on my phone.

I'm not used to it.

Totally fine.

And I think it's, you know, I really appreciate this.

I said, you know, this is, it's a little premature for me to talk about this because these are the questions I should have answered first.

So thank you for asking these questions.

All right.

Okay.

We had a question from Lynn and Bruce, which I think is also in, you know the kind of thing that would be good for me to answer they say when we recall events we mostly maybe always but not sure recall them as if we were spectators to our original event as if we were watching from an elevated position generally slightly above for example when i recall this event i have watched i'm watching myself dance about my bedroom playing my record and singing in my bedroom when i was three or four i recall one song i sang but not all songs but the memory is that this is an instance of what i did often so uh how do i explain that so and i think you can have each like i have any my my i have several early memories and they're all from my perspective and what i saw um but uh i think that when you get it to be a picture it's because you've conceptualized it and so this is something i don't i haven't I'm just going to say a little bit about this, but if you talk to people in anything in literature or in the movies or actually a lot of people in psychotherapy, they will talk about the stories that you tell about yourself.

And this is something, it is, you know, we talked about how you can have values and they can predict, you can then have expectations of whether something is going to go well or not.

And that happens just at the perceptual level.

Once you get conceptual, you actually also have means ends analysis and you have start creating stories.

If you did this and this and you used your volition here and you did this and you got this result.

And that is another one of the major organizers of your memory banks is, in effect, the stories you tell, which are your conceptualized identification of the sequence of events and your role in that sequence of events.

And this is what, you know, people say, and here they're talking memory, not concepts, but memory, meaning memories of events that you had.

They say, oh, you know, it's not very reliable, all these other things.

Well, it is true that when you conceptualize these, you probably still have some little vignettes of yourself dancing or the joy you felt.

Like I think of the one I remember from when I was, I believe, I'm pretty sure four, not three, at Beacon Hill Nursery School.

A very progressive nursery school.

Best in the city, but anyway.

I was sitting playing with this particular doll that had, which I won't tell you the details on.

And I had her doing something.

I don't remember what she was doing, but I had put some blocks in a circle.

And the blocks were just symbolic because it was a much more complicated situation than just a circle of blocks.

But she was busy doing something.

And the teacher came over and said, don't you want to play with the other kids?

And I said, no.

Like, why are you asking me this?

I'm having a good time here. and it's just a vignette right but i do have a remembrance of my being there and i have an image of the the doll you know she has a she was from somewhere in south america and she didn't actually have a body she just had kind of a trunk with a dress over it so you couldn't tell i still have her i still have her somewhere and i remember the picture of the blocks and i remember the no you know i remember so just i remember like three vignettes from it but i also have this whole story and of course this story is a story of my independence i wasn't concerned that i was being by myself i was perfectly happy to be myself and that was it so there's a whole conceptual story about this which was which is now now that i tell it to you it all is coherent and everything but the part that is say quote unquote actual memory are the little vignettes the image of the doll, the image of the blocks, that I have the body sense of kind of turning to look up at this person.

I have, I have the sense of having to be pulled my attention away, right?

Those are the things that are like the literal memory.

But what, when you think about the memory, it's the conceptualized version.

And if it's the picture of you dancing, you probably, you remember the thing you danced in different positions and it has some significance for you.

So you, it can be perfect sense that you would see yourself dancing that that would be symbolic so that's i wouldn't put anything more on that but i bet uh is lynn is here right lynn do you have do you have also a little bit of like vignettes of where is lynn did we lose her oh there she is i'm here like i've been like you said you know some of the songs but you have do you know what i mean by a vignette yeah i i think that that i do have i do have the specific memory of places and where i was was dancing but i but it's but one of the things that i think that bruce and i both thought was really common was we often see ourselves watching i mean we actually when we remember things we are actually watching us do this as opposed to participant being the participant right right so that's clearly conceptual right and that had to have been added when you were older when you had a sense of what you looked like when you were little girl right so that's okay and i think that's you know that's why the stories change and the stories i mean this is one of the things that's actually important in therapy is that you can change the story so like my story about that independence was what happened i then seem to lose it at a certain point now connected the dots i know that incident that caused me to become pretty second-handed and i've now cured that and so it's like so now the end of the story is happy again i regained that independence i had when i was four but that's part of what you do in in your own psychology is you you make the story you make the story differently and part of that could also be if you know it remembering when you re-remember something is people's this is a good good example of something don't quote me on the research but my understanding is that there's a lot of evidence that when you remember something the thing that can then get stored is really the way you process it now and it gets you know that creates a new version of the memory so if you keep i mean i've seen people do this you maybe have seen this if you're old enough you've seen other people distort their memories by kind of a distorted analysis i've definitely seen this happen and this is one of the reasons why memory for particular events can be a little bit spotty but um but i don't think it's so does that kind of address your question i think so well can i add something yes yes the experience was curious in the fact that our remember our memories were similar in the sense that we each had an image of looking down on a particular event as if we were an observer with the spielberg as a director he said okay put the camera up here and look down and it was always looking down on the event but it's not always looking down bruce it can be looking down i have ones that i look down on too okay but um but but all all that means is is that you've thought about it oh yeah picture that's really what it means and of course you've seen movies and you've seen pictures of yourselves right okay um susie so as pictures i think do help yes and he mentions movies also right so i think that this is you know you have a and and let's face it when you think about this or i'd mention yours too but lynn has the dancing one when you think about yourself dancing you know that's like a image of you you love the idea of this little girl dancing like crazy right well the particular memory i'm thinking of is one of which i was i was passive something was being done and it wasn't me doing something but being someone was telling me something or reacting to what i was doing and that's the focus of the memory ah so the focus is on um how the experience affected me Something someone did affected me later.

Right.

And so you have a picture of yourself being in that situation and not reacting.

And that concretizes it for you.

Yeah.

Yes.

Yeah.

Okay.

And that's probably actually something you needed to do a little bit of analysis of what happened there.

Like you probably remembered the incident and then you realize, oh, I was passive.

Well, it wasn't so much passivity because I had no other choice. but the thing was how that incident influenced me.

It wasn't conceptualization and realization.

Okay, great.

Good.

All right, great.

Thank you.

All right.

Let's see.

Ah, so I don't know if I've come full circle on why I don't use the term subconscious, but it's partly because that term sounds funny and makes it seem like it's a kind of subconsciousness.

It's partly because the way the term is used makes it sound like there's this little homunculus in there doing a bunch of stuff, which I think is very misleading.

And partly because I need to really make a distinction between my model, the way I look at this is different.

It's definitely different.

It's almost certainly different from how Ayn Rand looked at it, which doesn't mean, you know, I mean, that could shock a lot of people, but, you know, she is very careful.

She did not, in her, I make a distinction between what Ayn Rand edited for publication and what she said in Q&As and like the ITOE discussions and Q&As and the nonfiction writing course and the fiction writing courses that she gave, which were all, you know, ad lib.

And in her journals, the things she edited for publication, she says very little about psychology.

She does not have a definition of emotions.

She talks about emotions in various ways, but she does not define emotions.

She does not talk a lot about the true psychology parts.

And I do think that this has come up with respect to perception.

The thing that matters philosophically is that perception is the base and the perception is automatic and perception can't be wrong.

But, you know, she reports some old ideas of science that the brain actually integrated the sensation level, which, you know, Gibson, who was later, pretty much shot that out the window.

And I think Gibson's view of perception is right, but it doesn't change any of the philosophy. does change the science of how you get to percepts as the base but it doesn't change any of the philosophy the same thing with emotion so i have a slightly different view of what emotions are than she does but it doesn't change any you know the it changes it doesn't change the fact you need to go by reason not emotion it doesn't change the fact that you need to understand the source of your emotions it just means that there's more conceptualization than it appears from some of the ways that it's presented um oh but i was going to say but look at how careful she is when she does talk about psychology i'm going to go back to that statement that brian quoted a sense of life is formed by a process of emotional generalization this is a new term she's made up which may be described as, now get this, a subconscious counterpart of a attraction.

Counterpart.

Now, may be described as, she's trying to articulate what she's getting at.

She's not making a whole theory here.

She's saying, hey, this is something like a process of abstraction.

And it is.

It's in the same way that, well, and then she says, since it is a method of classifying and integrating, it's a method of things that are similar being recognized as similar.

And that's the way that it's similar.

But she doesn't explain a theory for this, right?

She just said, hey, there's something about this.

I don't know if that was convincing or not, but it seemed to me she was very careful not to make any big claims about how this worked in the way that she phrased that.

Okay, right.

Okay, now there were a bunch of other questions which were less basic.

And some of them are very difficult and complicated, and I'm basically going to probably make them unhappy.

Now, so let's see.

So the next person I have is Jerry sent me a bunch of notes.

And I hesitate to, she wants to know if she got it right.

She basically got it right, and I'm not going to try to repeat what she wrote.

But I want to say that this has not, until I actually write some articles on this, I do not consider the conceptualization definitive.

And as a result, I'm not going to try to edit what you wrote.

I think you basically got the idea of what I said.

I mean, not that you were asking me to edit.

But I just want to, did you see anything that I've said today that is in contradiction to what you understood, Jerry?

But what I'm trying to do is why do we care about all of this?

And you've done a good job today of explaining how it differs from traditional psychology and what was missing.

Yeah.

But from a more personal motivation standpoint, what I said is a greater understanding of the system can help one to use the structure to strengthen one's values and better align emotions with goals.

Yes.

You can also improve thinking skills through learning better how to assess memories, access memories.

I totally agree with all of that.

Okay.

Basically, to be able to strategically, you know, man is a being of self-made soul.

It's true.

All your past choices created the who you are now.

But with a model of memory and the memory-affix system, the whole kit and caboodle, you can now strategically shape your soul in any image you want to.

Yeah.

To clarify, memory, the structure is a structure of memory.

Yeah, of nodes and connections.

Go ahead.

And what your model is takes that structure and incorporates the affects.

Right.

It says how the structure is actually connected to the affect system so that it can create experiences.

And it also is partly how did the structure form and what is built on what.

So like the idea that values form first and concepts are, I haven't really done this, but I'll try to do this at some later time.

Really talked about the order in which all the things develop.

Like, I actually think that the value of communication is needed.

And words, words, mimicry of words needs to have been achieved.

And the value of communication needs to be a value before you can get real, true, volitional formation of concepts.

And that that's why kids' vocabularies suddenly explode.

They have all the concepts to a level, and then they get the idea of communication and that they can do this.

But that's only after, for example, they have motor control over their tongues and they can make sounds.

And they have done a hell of a lot of, you know, manipulation of objects so that they get much more intensive knowledge because they get perceptually, because they have manipulated an object like a pen. they have much more intensive knowledge about this entity than a dog could, because a dog can't manipulate it in the same way that a baby can.

So, okay.

Good.

Thank you.

I can get carried away.

I'm going to stop here right now.

Okay.

Great.

Who's next?

Let's see.

So Steve said, I'm trying to integrate your theory with some lectures I've heard by John Vervecki, a cognitive scientist from the University of Toronto.

So this is where I'm definitely on dangerous ground now because I don't keep up with what's going on.

Okay I have a couple questions there.

I have a couple questions but I will follow up from there.

Okay.

Propositional knowledge, procedural knowledge, perspectival knowledge, and participatory knowledge.

Now, I'm not entirely sure what all these things are, because I haven't studied this guy.

But one of the things he says, this is what he says.

Each of these kinds of knowing has unique form slash location in memory.

In particular, propositional knowledge is stored in semantic memory, while perspectival knowledge is stored in episodic memory.

So there may be something to this.

I really try not to be, I mean, he sounds like he's talking neuroscience, but if he's talking about a model of memory, I don't think this is the right model.

From what I can tell based on your lecture in part one, you're speaking on the basis of knowledge.

Perspectival knowledge arises from our unique point of view or perspective, enabling us to scan our environments, to identify salient elements and selectively attend to the relevant stimuli in each context it's a situational awareness allows us to identify what response is best fitted to appropriate to a given context so i mean i wouldn't make this distinction but certainly that's where you've got to start right you have to start with you interacting with the world and grasping the world um i'm trying to says i'm trying to foresee how this memory affect system is indeed the bait excuse me how does this become the basis of propositional knowledge which i suspect is where concept formation and the elucidation of principles is going to take place so oh and then and then he says does your structure account for the transition from one side of memory storage to another episodic to semantic so if that's true and it could be true i don't pay attention to neuroscience if episodic knowledge is in a different place from the brain than semantic knowledge and if that's really true all that means with the way i would interpret that is that words get their own special place and it's when words get connected to a differentiation that you get a concept and words definitely are unusual you know a word is a sound that you make intentionally when kids start by babbling right and they start babbling because it's fun at the same time that they're using their hands they're learning how to control things once they get volitional motor control one of the things they have volitional motor control over is their tongue and making the noises and that's kind of fun and that gets some attention from the people around them and including like if you have twins twins they say develop unique languages right of just the two of them understand stuff but you can understand how that would happen from the desire to communicate and the ability but in order for that to work you have to be able to make the same sound that you heard from the other person so mimicry is a critical thing for the development of words and here i really mean words not concepts you have to have words before you can get to the full conceptual level because the real critical thing is when you make a differentiation then connect it to a word that's what connects the word which you can make which involves physical action, you can connect that with a differentiation.

So with a whole bunch of other material that's already stored, and it's A, not B, right?

You have to be able to say it's these kinds of things, not that.

Now, that is a new kind of structure.

Concepts are a new kind of structure and they don't come into being until unless you want to do that that's why i think that you have to actually value the communication in some way before you can intentionally start learning words to be able to communicate to other people so what i would say is i don't know anything about neuroscience i'm not trying to i'm not trying to explain things in terms of neuroscience but there is a really new connection when you get of proper concepts with a word connected to a differentiation, that is a new structure and it could very well be the case that the words, that the node for a word that is now going to be in effect the, there's got to be a word for it, it's kind of the linchpin of the concept, right?

It's the thing that makes the concept retrievable because it's a differentiation that you're trying to retrieve.

That could be located in a different part of memory, but then it's going to be connected to all the other parts.

And, okay, so that's what I would say.

But this is the kind of thing that I consider to be very speculative.

But I am willing to go into the breach to try to give an answer.

Now, which is not such a good thing, but here we go.

Now, there were a few other questions.

What is the definition of the affect system?

So by affect, I mean any experience of pleasure and pain.

So the affect system is whatever there is, whatever the biology is that creates any kind of experiences that involve pleasure and pain.

And it seems to be tied into the memory, right?

So it's tied into the body.

It's tied into, you know, bodily awareness is definitely tied to pleasure and pain. but something like hunger is...