*Loud sound* *Loud sound* *Loud sound* All right, I hope you guys weren't too worried that I was I gonna show up. Oh, and I see I didn't get the beverage that I said I was getting. Just one second. Here we go. *Loud sound* *Loud sound* Okay. We have David. Where's David? Hey, David. Thank you for requesting this. *Loud sound* *Loud sound* *Loud sound* *Loud sound* *Loud sound* *Loud sound* *Loud sound* *Loud sound* *Loud sound* *Loud sound* *Loud sound* So let me just do that. You're going to get to see, you know, we have some real artists in the thinking lab. And you're going to get to see how good an artist I am. I'm really quite an artist and I can use scissors. It's really quite impressive what I can do. Can you guys see that right now? Yes. Okay. All right. We'll stop that for a second. All right. All right. Here we go. Let me mute everyone. Oh, yeah. I got to open everything. Okay. Participants. Chat. All right. All right. I think I'm ready. Are you guys ready? Okay. All right. Welcome. This is Jean Maroney of Thinking Directions. And today we have a master class. And the topic is introduction to the memory affect system, formerly known as the subconscious. And this is a topic that was requested by David Alfaro after I mentioned that I have a new model and that it was helping me explain a lot of things. And I warned him. And I warned him. And I warned him. And I warned him it might take more than one class. And then I got the his answer to the pre-work, which several people sent me questions for the pre-work of what are they interested in here. And they're great questions. And I realized when I saw David's pre-work that I had there's a lot of things to explain. And then one of the things that I'm excited about this model of the memory affect system is that I actually feel like I can make pictures of it. So it's literally a model. Like when you think of the Bohr model of the atom, you have a little picture with a nucleus and electrons spinning around. Or if you have the later one with the clouds, you have a picture of like little orbital clouds with different shapes. And I think that that's something I've actually been trying to get some way to visualize how memory works. I've really literally been working on that for 30 years. And the problem is it's complicated. And so I am going to explain the first level. I'm probably not going to get as much in as I thought I was going to get in. And then what I'm going to do is I'm because I think I can do that in like 20 minutes. And I've got some pictures, which you will get as a PDF after the class. Right now, you're only going to see them in the screen share. But you will get a handout from that after the class. And then what I'm going to do is I'm going to answer the questions that came in from other people first. And then we're going to take a shot at David's questions. And if other people have questions, we'll do that. And I'm going to just do a second class on this. I don't know when exactly. It's going to be sometime in June or July. I'm just going to fit it in somewhere. Because I have not yet delivered on my promise. And it's very helpful for me to try to explain this. So I want to do the next level. And that's a promise to you, David. I'm not going to get everything you want answered here. But I'll do another class. And then there'll be more questions. And we can do another class with you if that's all right. So I hope that's okay with that caveat. Okay. So I think so. Here we go. I'm going to share the portion of the screen. In order to understand this view of memory that I have, you really need at least a little bit of an introduction to Gibson's theory of perception. And you need to know a couple of things that Ayn Rand has said. Oops. I have these in the wrong order. Here's the first one. Sorry about that. Oh, they're not all the same size? Well, all right. Sorry, guys. You can tell I needed more time to really get this prepared. Gibson's theory of perception is consistent with Ayn Rand's theory of epistemology, which is that, first of all, you start tabula rasa. There is nothing in memory at all when you are born. And the first things that come in are entities. That that is the first source of knowledge and that that is automatic. And how does that work? And how does that work? Well, Gibson has a theory that explains it. And it really comes from the first entities that are formed are based on seeing moving, seeing moving things. It really is, you know, something that moves and makes noises. And why are they started with that? Because that captures your attention. So here we have my beautiful little room here and a person comes in and moves in closer and moves in closer. And what happens when that happens? The background stays the same, right? It's the exact same picture in the background. And yet the form of the person who is moving gets bigger and bigger and bigger. And in this case, I featured the face. It's also known that human babies are automatically attracted to look at faces. So there are a few built-in reactions to a baby. Like they have, if something touches them on their cheek, they turn and suck. And that's very helpful if they're going to nurse. And another one is that they're attracted to faces. Another, their attention is attracted to faces. Another is that their attention is attracted to moving objects. Okay. These are really, really simple. But if you just have that, what the perceptual system does is it actually, actually isolates one of these moving, one of these interesting moving things from the background. And that is the critical thing for memory. If you isolate something, so you say, oh, hey, this is a thing. This is something separate from everything else. That's what perception does for you is, hey, this is something. That then gets stored in memory. And that becomes a node in memory. And that is your first item in memory. It's like a node. Node. Node. Node. Node. And my view, well, my view is that this is what's needed for recognition. What's stored in that node is a bunch of perceptual data. It's actually not, yeah, I'm going to say a little bit more about that. The perceptual data has to do with this motion in the world here. And that permits a recognition. If you see that same similar perceptual thing, you get, in effect, an image up from the memory banks that matches. And that's what recognition is. Recognition is, you know, I've seen that before. It matches something in memory. Now, how do we think about memory for this? You need to know another piece of this, which is that the other way that you, isolation is all that's required for putting nodes in memory. Okay. You can do isolation. You don't have to have another person moving. You could do the moving. And this is how most of your entities that you isolate are isolated is by you moving in the world. And I didn't, I decided my art skills were not good enough to be able to draw pictures of how when you move, you know, things get bigger. But you can do it right now. I want you to move your head in toward the, whatever your camera is, right? Wherever it is. And whatever it is fills your screen, your field of view. And everything else just kind of floats. Right. And then you move back and this thing sort of stays the same and everything else flows around it. This is your action in the world is the main way that you isolate entities by perception. And this is why, for example, a door is something that you can perceive, right? It's a hole, right? But as you walk toward a door, you can actually see, you can actually see what's behind the door, like opens up. And these are the kinds of things that Gibson has focused on to show how, in fact, all of the basic knowledge of the world that you live in can be grasped by perceptual means. So what does this mean for a model of memory? It means that we need to have, we need a model that has a world of entities, which I'm just going to make simply a grid. Because one of the things that he also points out is, of course, as you're moving in the world, you see what's next to what. So the world that you map out is always of things connected to other things. And these moving objects are in the world. So the early connections you make are about these moving objects in the world. And of course, I showed the moving object in three different places. So we can move it to another place in the world and another place, another place in the world. Whoops. Oh, I only have two. Gee, I should have a third one. Yeah, don't. Okay. And whoops, what's happening here? Sorry, guys. This is, and what happens is that this moving entity guy gets connected to these nodes in the world. Okay. So far, this is pretty dry and boring, right? I hope not too boring. But anyway, that's how you start from tabula rasa. You just have a world of entities. Things start getting interesting when you add in your action and your experience. So I'm going to just add that. We're going to start you acting in the world. And you go from place A to place B. You are yellow. You're bright yellow in my pictures. And at place A, you have an experience of pleasure. Big pleasure. And then at place B, you have less pleasure. This is something that then gets stored as an incident. If something, if you have some action and your affect changes significantly, that gets stored. And so you could model this in the memory is that you start having below the plane of things. You start having these incidents that are positive or negative. The one I just showed was negative because it went from really very happy to, you know, not particularly happy. That's a negative experience. And it's associated in this little picture here. It's associated with particular place and a particular time sequence, right? This is all in time. The incidents always have a time course. There's, I think it has to be that the big change in affect has to happen fairly quickly or else it won't get stored. Because that's what calls attention to it. And attention is what stores things in memory. Now, it gets more complicated as soon as you have interacting people, right? So if suppose that moving blue thing moves from A to B in the same time that you move from B to C. And you go from really pain to pleasure. That's going to be experience. That's going to be an incident. That's going to get stored. And when it gets stored, it's going to get stored not just with you in relation to the world and your action. It's going to get stored with you in relation to the world and the other person's action. And that's important. So this is going to happen with, you know, I did a positive one there. It went from negative to positive. Here's another way it could go from negative to positive. It was really, really negative. And then it went a lot less negative. That's just stored as positive. You know, that storage in memory is not like emotions, right? Emotions have, they orient you to values or they orient you to threats. What's stored in memory is just good or bad, up or down. It's good if it got better in some way or less worse. And it's bad if it got less good or worse. And so here's another example of it going bad, which is from good to bad. I don't know. Can you see the colors here that I have on the beginning state and the end state? And the important thing here is incidents involve you. They are personal. They are your action in the world, your experience in the world, your experience of pleasure and pain. These things are all, you know, built into the system. This is, and part of what consciousness does is actually creates experience. And I think experience is required in order to have, in order to be able to store the appropriate things out in the world. There's a million things out in the world. Which ones are you going to store? You store the ones that have some kind of significant effect, which can be told by either a big change to the plus or a big change to the minus. And so this is what this, these incidents, which were both negative, one, a positive got less positive. The other is a negative went to, excuse me, a positive went to a negative. These would be stored like this. And you notice you're stored, you're storing both your connection to the world and your action in the world. And that other person, whatever they were doing, if it seemed like you were interacting, you store all of this. And this is now, you know, you see, there's a real structure here. When I say this is an incident, there are structures like this all over the place. Let me just. What happens is if one particular entity is associated with a lot of those positive incidents, that entity, when you actually, no matter how you become aware of it, it is going to pull up. We're going to pull up enough positive experiences. You're actually going to experience pleasure whenever this person or this thing or whatever it is, whenever you're around there. It's the same thing. It's still an entity node, but it's an entity node that has not just its connections to the world, but connections to your experience. And that's what turns it into a value. And what I'm talking about here, I think. I think. I think reptiles have probably this level of memory in them. I mean, I think this is really, really the absolute basics of memory. And you see, what I'm trying to show here is there's a level of specific entities. There's the world of entities, which are a lot of things that are not, you know, don't have a lot of specific data on them. They just, you know, they have relationships, but they're not, you don't have a lot of data on them. And then there are incidents, which are events that you experience a significant effect on. And based on these three layers, some of these entities will be values. Okay. So let me just pause for a second. So that took like 15 minutes of our hour class. This actually does solve a lot of problems, but you don't know how. But I'd like to just pause for a second and ask you guys if you have questions about what I just said. About just the content of what I just said. I'm going to stop the share. And David, you first. I mean, you may be wondering, how does this help? But any questions right off the bat? Susan has a question off the bat. And Earl has one in the chat, I'll ask. I think you need to unmute. Sorry. I don't want to spend much time on this, but you mentioned that reptiles have that level that you just finished with. Can you give a quick example? Well, what I mean is what you see there. So the next step, which I haven't yet been able to draw a picture of. The next step is that if you have that level of complexity in here. Let me just go back. I will screen share that again. If you have this level of complexity, it means that when you see a thing in a place where bad things have happened, you will feel an experience, which is aversion. And your action was involved. And that will motivate you to not go there. Or if you get in a place where good things have happened, you have enough data here to, in effect, have desire and move forward. And reptiles definitely run away from scary things and run forward to positive things. And I believe this is how it's done. Right? They've got a very minimal amount of consciousness. But just if you can form values based on perceptual data, that is enough to get desire and aversion. And that is pretty much all that we think reptiles have. Right? Is desire and aversion. So that's what I'm... So, I mean, if you think... I think salamanders. So, I have a lot of experience with salamanders because I live in Florida and they are all over the place. And they run away from the cats and hide. Right? And if you open a door to the outside, they run to the outside. Right? So, they do have desire and aversion. Does that answer your question? I was just having trouble picturing that. Yeah. Right. So, this is part... What I've been trying to understand is how do you go from a... This is based... So, Earl asked in the chat, when I search for Gibson's theory of memory, the top hit is Gibson's theory of direct perception. Right? Gibson doesn't talk about memory. Not one word about memory. Gibson doesn't believe consciousness is relevant to understanding anything. He's wrong! He's wrong! He's wrong! But, because he explains perception so well, that is critical to... So, I read him and the part he got right is super helpful because I really understood how you can isolate entities and isolate... The kind of perceptual data that you can isolate without any volition whatsoever. You do need movement. Movement is critical. But movement is not necessarily volitional. And as I said, it could be other things could be moving or you could be moving. And there are, you know, certainly other animals have built in non-volitional action. I mean, little baby horses, foals, I guess, are up and moving around immediately. So, they obviously have some motor control. We don't have that. That's actually something... I actually think that relates to our developing volition is that we need to... We need to learn to control our bodies. And I think that's where we actually develop volition is in controlling our bodies. So, we actually have to look... We have to develop the coordination, which, you know, horses literally do not have to develop coordination. They can run around. Like, it's something like a half an hour, an hour after birth, little foal can run around. And little cows can do it, too. I've seen cows, you know. We actually had cows on our farm and one of them had... A couple of them had calves. And they're up and around pretty much immediately. So, Gibson, it is his theory of perception. And I am building on that. So, I think you need his theory of perception to crack the code on what's happening in memory. But that's just one piece of it. And the thing I was going to say, the thing I've been trying to explain for a long time, is how do emotions get triggered? Because that's the big mysterious thing. Whenever people have questions about the subconscious, it always comes down to where do these emotions come from? And to be able to see that you could have desire and aversion with this simple structure, I think is helpful. And then the more complex structures we will eventually get to. Phillip has a question. So, if I understand you correctly, you've discussed three elements so far. You've got the entity, you've got the incident, and then you've got a value. You need an issue. And the world of entities. And the world of entities. Oh, okay. Which is very important. Yeah. I don't quite understand that part. Well, so, let me just say. So, I think understanding incidents is important. So, can you remember the first thing you remember from when you were as small as possible? Can you tell me an incident that happened when you were really little? Um, I was three years old and it was Christmas morning and I was sick. Okay. And so, tell me the scene. Can you, where were you? Uh, well, on my back in the bathroom crying because I was constipated. Okay, great. And so, you have like an image of the bathroom. You have a memory of the, of how you felt, which is really uncomfortable. Yeah. You remember yourself crying. Were there any people around? Uh, I believe my mother was around. Yeah, it's a little vague, but like, was she, and do you have like a vague sense of whether she was behind you or in front of you or something? Probably over me. Probably over, right. So, but that's not the thing that you were focused on. She was just there. Right. So you have, and you have a map of that house, right? Not a very good map, I bet. Or unless did you live there for a long time? Oh, only till I was three, four, five. Right. So you could make a sketch of it, but I bet there are parts that you're not, you don't remember very well. Right. Right. So that was the first world of entities that got stored in your memory. And that incident has the world in it, right? It actually brings up the world. That's part of what you need to have the sense of the action. Right. So you were aligned on your back crying, right? You were probably wiggling around some too. Sure. Let's do that. And you know, was it cold on the floor? I don't remember that. Okay. That wasn't, that wasn't a salient thing, but you know, the things that were salient to him was the sound. When I, when I, when I talk about this vision is so much easier to deal with than touch and hearing, but they were all, those three are all perceptual systems for humans. And Gibson, there's a, he has two books. Well, he has more than two books, but he goes into his theory in great depth on his book on vision. He also has a book called the senses considered as perceptual systems that explains why all of them work this way. the way, but for us, for our purposes, we don't need that. So the point is in these incidents, a whole lot of things get kind of stuck together in a, in a, in their own structure. You see these incidents have a definite structure, right? In this incident, a whole bunch of connections get formed. Does that make sense? How do you mean it would the incident may be crying in the bathroom? Yeah. Any incident. So here's an incident. Here's, here's the bathroom is the world of entities here. This is you crying and you actually have, there's actually a lot of data there about your body and that kind of thing. This is just a schematic, right? And this particular one didn't have a lot of interaction with your mom. So I'm going to actually use this picture instead. So the incident would be, um, I'm in pain. I'm on the floor. I'm crying. I want it to stop. Yeah. It's an unhappy memory and it's stored with a whole lot of data. I mean, you were able to tell us a little story about it and you pull that all up at once. That's all closely connected. Okay. Yeah. And I think this is one of the kernel kernel. So when people, when cognitive psychologists, I mean, I mean, I mean, experimental psychologists talk about memory. They just talk about linking concepts together, words together, or percepts together. None of them talk about affect. None of them talk about affect. And that's, what's different about this model is that I've thought about how does affect get built in there? Because if you have, if you have an incident like this, if now let's take a, let's take a different one. Suppose you walked up to a dog and it bit, it's bit your nose, which happened to my brother when he was about five or six years old. Now what, when the next time you get, you know, this far away from a dog, this memory is going to come up and you're going to feel an aversion to getting closer to that dog. Right. Right. Immediately. Right. So these incidents, which I think are stored because of the big change in affect are what lets you have an expectation that if I move forward, this will be bad. If I move backward, this would be good. And you need expectations to be able to form emotions and for, frankly, for cognition to have any value whatsoever. And so this is the critical structure that you need in memory to be able to have it not be just a sterile set of information. Does that make sense? Sure. It's the, the world of entities that I'm not clear on, but we can go on if you want. Okay. So then I'm just going to stipulate. This is one of the things you get from Gibson is he, he talks about how everything, as you move through the world, you actually store all these things and you get, so you can recognize, like if you walked up to a cave, you've never seen before. You could tell it was a cave because as you walk up to it, the same kinds of things happen to the visual field as with every other hole. Actually, a con, I guess it would be concave. If you walk up to anything concave, you can tell it's concave from quite a distance away, just by the way the visual field changes. Same. In relation to everything else. Yeah. Well, just, so you have something. Okay. Okay. You have behind you a bookcase that has concave holes in it. Right. Yeah. I want you to just turn around and walk around a little bit, literally walk around from one side of the room to the other side of the room. And look, you guys can all do this with a bookcase. You just need a hole. And I want you to look, keep looking at the bookcase, but move in position and see how different parts of the inside are revealed or not revealed. All right. You get that now. Now, next to that, you have a cabinet that is convex, not concave. And now I want you to look and see what happens when you go around looking at the concave thing instead of the convex, convex thing instead of concave. You get what I'm saying? Something that sticks out versus something that has a hole in it. Right. Right. And the visual field behaves differently in these two cases. And this is something you pick up perceptually, and this is how you isolate objects. And this is why you can go into a new place and be able to navigate around it because you have, your perceptual system has actually built up kind of a world, a world of entities. So some places you can remember and that those places that you remember, you can actually use when you go someplace new, you can see the things are in effect similar. That this similar kind of thing will have this effect. Well, that's yeah. Okay. Hold on one second. I, oh dear. Where is this? Hold on one second. I apologize. I'm so disorganized. I have to pay my housekeepers. I just pause the recording. I'm coming back. I have money. Yes. Okay. Hey, Parker. and have money yes it's hard to do. Sorry guys I did a dental procedure this morning. I got a crown on a tooth and I'm just a little discombobulated here. Okay let me start the recording again. Did I pause it? Hmm. Doesn't look like you're recording. So I think I recorded all of that. Did I start the recording before? Yes. Yes you did. All right. Okay. All right. Oh dear. All right. Well, I don't know if Stephanie is on. There she is. I'm here. You're gonna need to cut this part out. Okay. So I apologize. Okay. Is that? I'm hoping that's enough so we can go on from the world of entities. So the point is that that is a map like the context that gets created and that all happens automatically. So you're not recording right now. All right. Let me start over again. More record. Resume recording. Am I recording? Yes. Okay. Yes. Okay. Yes. Okay. Yes. Okay. All I wanted to say about the world of entities is that it's a context that gets created automatically by perception. It's necessary to be able to navigate in the world. And so part of the thing, if you, if you just think of memory as one node connected to another, like one concept connected to another concept, you're missing that there's this whole. Fabric of information that gets built up by perceptual processes that is connected to every important, certainly all to all values and certainly to all concepts. They are in connected to the place and time and what happened there in an important way. And that's, so you need to have, not just, you, you, you shouldn't think of the connections that get made as being just one thing gets connected to another. No, there's this whole structure of connections between the world and the, say two things that are interacting. Good for now. Yeah. Good enough for now. Okay, great. And then I'm going to take Jan's question. Then I'm going to answer. So here's my plan, David. Now then I'm going to answer the few that came in and then we're going to talk with you about your questions. Is that okay? Yes. Okay. Great. Um, Jan, you had a question? Yes. You are three layers diagram. The bottom is the plus, plus, plus, plus, minus, minus. And the, you talk about desire version. Does this also include, does this means is associate either positive feelings or negative feelings? Okay. So we've got to, let me, let me share this again. Okay. So here I'm talking about the structure of memory, which is not an experience. So memory is a quasi static phenomenon. So everything you do now, you know, you're hearing me say things, you're probably storing some new information, making new, some connect, some new connections as we go. But memory is roughly static. It gradually evolves with every experience, but at any given time it's quasi static. And so what you are going to remember or what you are going to be feeling is based on the current state or the current content of your memory, the current connections you have in memory. Now, once these incidents are stored, they can create emotions for the rest of your life. And the point is that they will only create emotions. So this has to do with recall, right? We've only been talking about storage so far, but what happens is when you see a situation that is similar, then you can have an expectation of a positive or a negative. And those simple things, if you just expect something positive, if you go in this way, you will feel desire to go there. If you expect something negative, if you go this way, you'll feel aversion to go there. And that's the absolute simplest emotion. So the emotion is an experience that's created only because you have this structure. If you didn't have this structure, you would have no emotion with respect to these things. Is that answering your question? Yes. No. So if you don't have the memory of this, this is completely new things. It's neutral. And then through your perception, you may create memory at that moment. Well, right. So you still will have physical pain and physical pleasure. And so new incidents will get created. But the point is you won't have emotions. So pain and pleasure. And, you know, like if you're like my tooth hurt a little while ago and I took some Tylenol so it wouldn't hurt. You know, that's not an emotion. That's just my tooth hurts. And that was a negative experience, but I took some Tylenol that made it feel better. So that was, so that I've got Tylenol stored as Tylenol. Yeah. That gets me going from more pain to less pain. Yay. Good thing. Let's go get Tylenol. Okay. So, um, good for now. Yeah. Thank you. Okay. Good. Um, so here are a couple other questions. So Lynn says, how does our current processing of inputs like attention, experiences, perception affect the outputs, ideas, feelings, and voluntary action. The critical thing there is what are you paying attention to? So memory is essentially, it's the, the recognition process is passive. The thing that is reactive about it is that if there's some big, like if you have something that has a lot of connections, it's going to come up really dramatically in a way. Um, but depending on what you pay attention to, that's going to determine what parts of memory are going to get activated and what parts of memory get activated, determine whether you rec, you know, whether you recognize and whether you have an expectation about something. So like, suppose let's just take, um, the issue of the dog, right? My brother, uh, the dog bit his nose when he was five years old. Right. It was, it was not the end. It was, I was very surprised to find out later that he doesn't like dogs. And it's because of that incident. I didn't know we didn't have dogs when we were kids, but suppose. what's another suppose. Uh, he was being introduced to a foal, a small horse. And it's hard with perception. What I'm looking for is a case where we would say, Hey, that's similar. Why doesn't he have that reaction, but it doesn't occur to him. And so we probably need a more complicated case for that. Cause I think a foal either looks similar enough to a dog that he would be afraid, or it looks different enough that the memory wouldn't get triggered. Um, so Lynn, I don't know if that answers your question. Yes, it does actually. Okay. And then the other part is that, um, there's a, there's like a memory takes like a second or two to respond. Um, name five countries in Africa, uh, Madagascar, Egypt, uh, uh, Congo, South Africa. Okay. You see, it took me a little bit of time to just bring up some names of countries that it takes, it takes a little bit of time. And there is a definitely like a cycle time. So you have an experience based on the current state of memory, but that sometimes draws your attention. I mentioned that moving things, draw your attention. Emotions draw your attention to their objects. So what comes up from the memory affects system can sometimes affect what your attention is on, or you can volitionally change what your attention is on. And that is going to change what comes up in the next, you know, in the next round, as it were like in the next second or so. And that's why you can actually do something like some of, you know, the tactic of the three minute walk. I mean, this literally happened to me yesterday. I was on the phone with Susie and I made the mistake to look at an email that really ticked me off. And I said, I'm going to have to, I'm going to have, we were pretty much finished. I need to stop and go do a three minute walk. And I literally walked out the door and I got across the street. I thought, you know what? This is the same situations that thing I figured out last week. I don't have to be upset about this. And they totally calmed down. I walked in and I handled it. And it was, I was actually very proud of myself for that particular thing. But you know, the, the, what you do with your attention affects what comes up. Okay. Thank you. Okay. Great. Bruce had a question. Does the memory affect system include what some call the unconscious where exists quote, the deepest hidden part of the mind containing repressed memories and drives. Okay. So I don't, so I don't agree that there's anything. So there are drives. When people talk about drives, what they're really talking about is some kind of a compulsion to do something. And if you've taken do what matters most, you know what I think about compulsions. Compulsions are something where the value has been made strong in part, because the threat behind you is really strong. So you're doing something both to avoid a threat and to get a value. And it's like, so it's got a double whammy of motivation. And that's why compulsions are so hard to break. Because you have to deal with both parts of that. You can't just deal with the positive part. You have to deal with the negative part too. And typically if it's a compulsion, it's because it's some irrational fear that you're avoiding. You know, there's nothing. I mean, you would feel a compulsion to run away from a truck coming down the street, but that's not a problem. We don't normally call that a compulsion. When they talk about drives, they're really talking about compulsions. Repressed memories. What happens there. So the next phase, we're going to add volition to this. What you've gotten so far doesn't involve any volition. But when you add volition, you could deliberately say, I'm not going to think about that. I'm not going to think about that. And as a result, you could actually break some connections and, or make it so that something that would normally have a connection doesn't have a connection. By your choice of attention, by your choice to say no. Now that turns out to be very important. Saying no, like how many of you have learned that in prioritizing, you have to learn how to say no. You really need to learn how to say no. If you don't say no, you have kind of a flat value hierarchy and you're in conflict all the time because everything seems to be of equal importance. So our ability to say no is very important. But if you misuse it, if you say no to things that actually matter, what happens is you get what's called compartmentalization. So you have things that are connected over here and things that are connected over here and they should be able to, in effect, trigger each other. But they don't because you put like a big block between them by making a point of preventing that connection happening when it would normally happen. And that's what causes repression. Repression, all repression means is that it's not easy to bring out the reason for the emotion. That's when people say you're repressed. All that means is the emotion is difficult to introspect because you say, well, I'm angry and I'm angry about this, but that doesn't make sense. You know, the intensity of the anger doesn't make sense given what seems to be the cause. So there's some other factor here. What is it? And if you can't figure that out, if you can't figure out what the elephant in the room is, it's probably been repressed. And I mean, I had this, I haven't repressed very much. I think this is one of the reasons I've been able to do what I do. And, but I had, I realized at a certain point, there was an incident that happened just as I turned nine with a, with a friend of mine, a good friend of mine who basically never spoke to me again after this incident. And I remembered the incident and I remembered that she never spoke to me again. And it was really sad. And it was actually a big surprise to me realize, oh yeah. The reason she never spoke to me again was because of that incident. Ah, like that was like not connected. The one wouldn't come up with the two. They'd come up independently. And at one point when I was trying to understand some social issues I had, they both happened to come up with the two. They both happened to come up and I looked and I said, oh my God, that's a causal connection that I had, that I had repressed because it was my fault that she never spoke to me again. And that was very, very painful. And so I avoided feeling that. And so there was no connection. It doesn't mean you can't make the connection anew, but it happens that way. You're like surprised. It's like, oh yeah, I'm pretty sure that's what caused that. That makes perfect sense. And then it's, it's de-repress. It's not something that is that easy to do by a direct process. So I would say that those are completely explained by the structure of the memory banks and the structure of the values. Does that answer your question on that part? Well, it's interesting and it's helpful, but I say that I really formed my question without precision, because I really want to know if you recognize the difference between what people call the subconscious and the unconscious. And the unconscious. Is there a distinction? So I do think that there's, there are some things that are not in the memory affect system that sometimes people think are part of a psychology. Like coordination, which we think is handled by the cerebellum is not part of the memory affect system. It is something that happens that it requires consciousness. It requires conscious experience, but it is not at all related to what gets stored and, or the creation of emotions. And I have a reason why I think that, but so sometimes people, sometimes when people talk about habits and forming habits, they give examples of literal physical coordination type things. And I don't think those belong in this discussion at all. I think that's a very different thing. And it is not, it's not, let me explain why I think this. So I've been studying by this guy, uh, rock, uh, what was Rocky's last name? I forgotten his book is returned to center. And I have some, he diagnosed some joints that are like too stiff. They're too tight. And of course that means that there are muscles that are contracted that shouldn't be. And he's given me some bizarre, simple stretching exercises. Like literally one of them looks like this. You, you stand, you stand up, you actually put some little wedges under some parts of your toes. And then from a standing position, you take your left hand, you go bend down to your knee and then follow the right outside, right of your calf down to your foot and come up and do that 12 times a day. And if I do that, my gate, when I walk is completely different. Wow. Like I can actually tell when I go out, if I haven't done it because I wasn't loading my right foot. foot right. And that is something that is not a conscious process. It takes someone like him that actually has figured out how the coordination system works. And it's something that happens automatically and is not volitional at all. Um, but, but I think all this stuff, anything conceptual memory, memory, ethics system, anything that has any conceptual significance at all is in the memory ethics system. Okay. Thanks. Yep. Um, uh, what are your thoughts about the cause and purpose of dreaming? I have no thoughts on the cause and purpose of dreaming. I know nothing about it. It's, it's, you know, it's a kind of technical issue. Um, and there's a question from someone else. Let me see where it is. Here it is from Heather. Uh, similar to Bruce's question, how things get hidden in there either purposely being repressed or suppressed or accidentally forgotten memories triggered years later. Sometimes times you repress things and don't realize you're doing it. Okay. So you can't deliberately repress something. The way something gets repressed is you say no to it often enough, which is the suppression process. And if you do that often enough, you, you, every time you say no to something, you break some links. And if you do that, um, through a threat orientation, you're actually motivated to break that link and you become motivated to not go there. And that's when the thing gets repressed. Uh, so every time you suppress, you are in effect starting a repression process. This is why if you suppress, if you say, no, I can't handle that right now, which, you know, sometimes you can't in a literal emergency, you can't, but if you suppress. It is very important that after the fact, you go back and you look at the whole thing and you reintegrate that because otherwise you are starting a, uh, disintegration process. Um, as to a forgotten memory that's triggered years later, it just wasn't connected to anything. There can be something like this that you just, you know, it just wasn't connected to anything else. And somehow now it's connected to something or, uh, you made a connection. You made a new connection that helps. Um, is, is Heather on here? I actually, yes, here she is. Heather, does that address your question at all? Yeah, that's really helpful. Thank you. Um, and your answer to the previous question as well. Okay, great. Okay. So David, So what, what should we start with? Do you want me to live? Do you want to just do the, in the order? Yes, please. Yes. Yeah. So we'll just start at the top and we'll talk for a while until one or both of us cries uncle. How about that? All right. Deal. So David says, and I think I called you David before. I apologize. It's David. Yeah. Don't worry. Yeah. Well, I do try to pronounce people's names correctly. Okay. Uh, he says my primary interest is improving the speed and accuracy of my judgment in complex information rich environments like hiring and research. So you see, we have a little ways to go in the model before we can get to that. I was a little intimidated. Oh my God, how am I going to get that far in this class? However, I, I think I can map out all what you've said into a new way to, to, to, to explain the questions. Um, I think that you have given up the basics to, uh, to understand the basics. I mean, the, the, the, the root of my questions, I think. Okay. Well, I'm delighted to hear that. So let me give you a teaser for what we're going to talk about next time with respect to that general question. Right. Um, because, um, you know, we've been talking about perception and we've talked about relatively simple structures and yet there's a definite structure. Let me go back here to this picture, this one picture, because I think you see how I say this entity is a value. Um, and that's because it's, it's, it's really, it's literally, it's not just connected to the world of entities and whatever it's connected to these past incidents. So, you know, it's not just a bunch of them, enough of them, so that it actually triggers positive affect just by being recognized. Right. It's a definite structure. That is not, um, you know, when, when people talk about, uh, like connectionism is a, the connectionist idea of how memory works. It's just, you know, everything is connected to everything. And the whole question is why do the particular connections get made? Like in neural networks, one of the things that they're trying to do, this is probably talking a little beyond what I know, but you actually probably know more about neural networks. I bet you've been working with them David, but, um, you know, part of the thing you're trying to do when you train the neural networks for like an AI system is you're trying to make sure that you figure out what should it, what should it connect together versus not connect together. And there, the way they do it is they find out how people have connected things together. They basically, it's completely second-handed based on what people all over the world have already done. And the question is how do you do this in a first-handed manner and how does it even get started? And what we've shown here is how it gets started. But once you add volition in here, first of all, you can decide to act to gain and keep values. And if you have a negative experience doing that, you can figure out how to gain and keep those values in a different way. So you can get positive experience all along the way, and you can make the value be very, very strong. This is what the rational goal setting class is guys. The rational goal setting class is designed. So you pick a goal that you may not actually feel a lot of passion for now, but if you use the method of rational goal setting and just in time planning, you take volitional action that pays off in pleasure, you celebrate as you go. So you actually store up a whole bunch of incidents where acting to gain and keep this thing actually gets you pleasure. You put a lot of attention on it. So you actually learn about it. So you create connections that way. And the goal, the thing that you're trying to create in the world becomes highly connected into everything else. And that is, you know, that's when you add volition to this, you can actually choose and you can now have a value hierarchy where your choices are determining which are the biggest values as opposed to just your experiences. Right now that I think is necessary before you can even form concepts. Concepts are formed. Concepts, I think if, if there's some Montessorians in the thinking lab, you know, the Montessori method is that you show two similars and a different in effect to get the kid to get the concept. And if you do that to a three year old kid, if you show them two things that are similar and one different and you tell them the word that goes with it, they get the concept. They get it all the way down. If you have something isolated, either if someone isolates it for you so you can see what's similar and different, you can make that differentiation. You make that isolation. You will form a new node in the exact same way that the perceptual system, it isolates automatically for you. But if you do this by say selective attention and you actually see two similars and one different, a new node is formed. That's a concept. Now the first concepts are just visual and they're just, but they're like, it's a new kind of thing. And you say, oh, those go together. And that intention, you know, you see your action was involved here in perception. It's motor action is involved, but volition isn't, but in conceptualization, it's like, oh, hey, this is special, right? There's some intention involved in seeing if you used your attention in order to make the isolate this thing. And that means it has some extra zip to it. It's got, it's tied. It's not just a new node. It's a new node that's tied to your action. And because there's clarity in realizing that this thing is different, it's also got a little bit of value significance to it. Um, now when I think words come on because there's a value in communicating to other people. And until there's a value to communicating to other people, you're not that interested in the words, but you know, there is, you know, there is communications or pointing and stuff like that before the words come in. And twins are notoriously, they develop languages between themselves and are late to learn proper languages because they've got all the communication they want. They're happy. Right. So, and, but that's yet a new structure, right? Right. When you add a word to connect to the concept, that's a new perceptual structure. The word, a word, there's been a lot of work done in this. Um, the isolation of words is done by the perceptual system in exactly the same way. The isolation of entities is done by, by the hearing system, the exact same way it's done by vision of the isolation of, um, entities. It's the, the systems work exactly the same. It's the same mechanism that lets you isolate a word. And so they can get stored as a node, a word can get stored as a node, but to turn it into a full concept, it needs to be tied to this identification. I see you're, you're, you're absorbing that. Yeah. I mean, can I, can I check a couple of things? Yes. Um, in the, in the example, maybe it's, it's good idea if I read my example. Sure. Yes. Let's hear your example. Okay. So, uh, I'm gonna read it. This is the example. Meet interview. I am interviewing a candidate, uh, and the candidate is describing how they resolved a major outage. 10 minutes earlier while discussing a different project, uh, but with the same team. Right. Uh, this person casually mentioned that their team never got around to automating post mortems. Um, so what it, so the, the, the, the desired move or the, the same thing to do for me is that the moment the candidate says outage, I instantly surfaced the earlier admission that he did. And then I asked earlier, you said post mortems were an automated. How did that limitation affect the speed of depth of this outage analysis? Uh, I mean that, that recall. Uh, now with your model and with all the things that you just said, I think I can reward that or can explain in a deeper way. Uh, because your, your model suggests that the direct connection between a specific perceptual, perceptual cue. In this case, the word outage. Mm-hmm. Uh, along with the stored incident. Uh, it was an incident. There was an incident. He says, um, um, uh, it's an, and, and, and it is an, um, the incident that they don't have a automation of post mortems. Right. Uh, so it is linked to a value. It is the value. Your value. Right. Exactly. My value. And the value is efficiency problem solving. Right. Yes. Like you want incredible problem solvers. Exactly. Great troubleshooters. Right. And that's why that, that cue triggered and was so visible. So, so, so hot tension calling because that's an important value. And not only that David, I bet that you have very consciously thought, this is one of the things I've got to get out of interviews is can they actually troubleshoot? Because you've actually, you know, that's why you asked those, that question. Right. You want to hear how they handled this outage because you're trying to figure out if they can troubleshoot. Right. Right. Right. Right. What I'm noticing in this process, I'm doing a lot of introspection and retrospection is that, well, it would be fantastic. Something I don't do is, is, is automatic, but I should make it explicit is a comprehensive list of, oh, well, I mean, a list of values that I am looking, um, that will guide way. I'm going to guide way better my way that I, I, I, I interview people. I don't have that list. Aha. Right. So this gets to the next level, which I haven't, you know, which I promise, but haven't really said anything about. What you're saying is you want to, you've, you've already conceptualized a lot of things. Like you actually know processes of troubleshooting. Right. And you know, processes of interviewing and you know, like you've actually learned all of these things. Right. And process of managing and you have a moral code that helps you judge people. Right. Just like, you know, is this person being straight with me and that kind of thing. Right. So what you're saying is you actually want to, you actually want to get some principles of interviewing particular to the kinds of work that you do. And that's actually something that's probably a little bit unique to you because your vision is a little different and your priorities are a little different. And this means you actually need to derive some principles. And what a principle is, I think all a principle is, is a concept that has been turned into a value. So it's a big abstraction where you've got some concept and you say, oh my God, like, let's see if we can name one of them for the troubleshooting and actually email me because there's another member of the thinking lab who I bet you would love to talk to. He, he's a world-class troubleshooter and I bet he would love to talk with you about how do you identify who can, how to, you know, if someone else can troubleshoot. I bet he would love to talk to you about that. Right. But anyway, you email me and I'll do a double up to an interview. Yeah. What do you think is like, I have an idea. You tell me, what do you think is a characteristic of a person who was a really great troubleshooter? Well, it's a person that can think in fundamentals, but in programming. They get to the root cause. Exactly. I mean, it is, it doesn't go, it doesn't explore routes that are not good options to explore. But in some mechanisms to identify, oh, definitely the problem should be around here then goes and dig deeper. But that's the correct way to go. Right. So one thing I'm hearing is that they are really good at seeing what's fundamental versus what's Noice. essential and what's non-essential. Yeah. Right. Now to be able to judge that, you need to know what's essential and what's non-essential. Yeah. The other thing that I know this other person has talked about with me is there's also being willing to go, not assume that the way the person told you the problem is actually what the problem is. Sure. Right. You have to actually know firsthand what is the actual problem because people will tell you this is not working and they'll tell you something. And it turns out they have the terminology wrong and they didn't notice the big box on the screen that says click here if you're having this problem. You know, there's dumb user mistakes. You really don't know what the problem is until you go look at it and get that firsthand data. Yeah. So that also is something, there's a firsthand element I think in good troubleshooters. Yeah. I mean, that's the ability to make sure that you can replicate the problem by yourself. Yes. Right. Yes. Right. So they really concretize it. So basically, this is what good thinkers do. They can think in essentials and that requires being able to concretize, differentiate, and name the root cause. That's what's required to think in essentials. And we've kind of clarified this a little bit here, but this is the kind of thinking that you could do to, because there are probably other aspects of these good troubleshooters and judging them. Oh yeah. And the more you conceptualize that, in principle, you say, ah, like this. I mean, now that you've named this, you're going to be looking for ways to figure out if they can figure out, if they can name things in essentials. You're going to be totally doing that. Right. And you're going to be wanting to train your people to be able to think in essentials, which, you know, there is work on that in, I mean, the definitions work in the thinking lab really does help people learn how to think in essentials. It really does folks. That's how I learned. It really is. Um, uh, but when you get at this level and you're starting saying, wow, thinking in essentials, this is really a principle or let's go to one that's familiar to everybody. Honesty. It's like, oh my God. Oh my God. And the second, I think I need to fake something. No, no, wait a minute. Honesty. This really matters. I figured out this matters. If I think faking is going to be a benefit, there's something wrong in there. Because I discovered that whenever you don't do it, do it in reality, boy, do you ever get in trouble. And so you have an emotional reaction to the idea of honesty and you, you David have an emotional reaction to the idea of essentialization. No, not everyone does. Right. Some people really love to just, I mean, just, uh, they kind of revel in not actually getting to one thing, but to just explore everything. And it's just so interesting. And one thing leads to another. They don't value that yet. And so this is another level. So when the concepts are built on the ability to value and volition, and then principles are when you actually turn the concepts into values, into chosen values, which is a new level of structure that makes it very easy. That the, the, this is, I I'm going to figure out how to explain this, but the concepts get organized by genius and differential, because that's basically, that is, that is a structure. That is a structure of concepts. And if you really have them all concretized and differentiated, you actually have super highways super highways behind between concepts that make it very easy to get from one to another. Some of you may have heard of the concepts in a hat game that objective is used to do in the sixties. They take two concepts and explain how did they relate. And if you have, uh, if you understand the structure of the genius, genius species structure of knowledge, you can actually go back and forth from different areas very easily. Um, and also like some philosophical knowledge, but, um, but the thing that lets you, and that does help you like if you're learning for a test, that's very helpful. Right. But if what you're trying to do is create a fantastic business in the world, what you need is another layer of organization around your values. And you need to, you need to actually be able to use this conceptual information to help guide your action in the world. And that's what principles are. Yeah. I love it. Okay. Yeah. You're excited about that. I'm very happy. Yeah. I'm very happy. Thank you. Thank you. All right. Good. Well, I'm wondering if this is a, enough of a first good lick at this, um, that we could draw a line here. And I, you know, I'm really delighted you picked this topic to be because I'm really excited about this. And as I said, I have, I, the reason I was so excited is I was able to make pictures, but the pictures I made for this class are way better than the pictures I made last summer. I think they're much clearer. I just need to now make the next level of pictures for the next level of things. Because I think for visualizing this, it's understanding that there are particular patterns of connections, structures of connections that are what we mean by a stored value or are what we mean by an anti-value or are what we mean by a concept or are what we mean by a principle in the psychological sense. Those are stored things in memory. And I think that that really could help eliminate a lot of floating abstractions that are out there. And I'll say, you know, just as a heads up, you know, the Leonard Peacock's class on the art of thinking has been turned into a book. And I'll tell you, it's filled with floating abstractions. Now, I don't know if that's from a psychological standpoint. And it's interesting. First of all, I'm not criticizing Leonard Peacock. This is a class in psychology. And it is a known thing that when you, I mean, he is the most clear writer in philosophy ever. I mean, I would say that above Ayn Rand. I find Leonard Peacock clearer than Ayn Rand. I find Opar clearer than anything Ayn Rand wrote because it's all laid out in a logical structure. Every point is concretized in a way you can absolutely tell where the example is that goes with the point. Everything is integrated. It's like a train gathering momentum. It is the most clear written book ever. And when you try to write in a field that is not the area that you're the expert, things flow. And that's what I'm seeing. Actually, it's very interesting because I was there live when he gave those lectures. And I didn't agree with everything then, but I found them very interesting. And I actually see now the last, whatever it is, 32 years, I've been working on the things that were confusing in those lectures. So, and I think that clarifying these, including throwing out the term subconscious, which, oh my God, is just whenever people don't understand how something works, they just say, oh, well, that's a subconscious process. Or that's subconscious integration. Or that's your subconscious does it. And they just hand wave it. And you can't understand anything if you hand wave. And so this actually gives us something that we can grab onto and see, oh yes, I see how that happens. And now I have volitional control over it. And I mean, I'm literally applying this math, this understanding. I've decided to become a really powerful business woman. And I'll tell you, this requires a change in my value hierarchy, folks. And the reason I have the confidence to do it is because I understand exactly what is needed in order to change my value hierarchy. And I'm willing to do it. And so, okay, here we go. It's a little rocky ride, but I'm going to be an intellectual business woman. And that's what I need to do to achieve my goal. So, okay, I'm all in. And it's because of the model. So, sorry. That was a little patting myself on the back, but I think it's, I do think it's important. I think it's actually pretty exciting. So, any closing comment from David? No, thank you very much. I am going to rethink my pre-work in the terms of your lecture today. Okay, fantastic. I look forward to talking about the next round. Thank you. Okay. All right. All right, everyone. Thank you very much for coming and for your patience with me as I, you know, this is a hard class to put together, but really fun. Really fun. Thanks a lot. Bye-bye. Thanks a lot, Gene. Bye-bye. Thanks a lot, Gene. Bye-bye. Thank you. That was great. That was great. Very, very, very good. I'm going to go to the next slide. And I'll see you next time. thank you